Hello, welcome to my talk. Now we are going to talk about making apps that users love.
Not only that, because it's hard enough to make one app that users love, but what we
are trying to do is not only to do that for one team, but to help dozens of teams at the
same time do it. So, this will be a story of some of the tools that we are using at
Appsilon to address this problem. But before we talk about what we do want to achieve,
let's talk a little bit about what we want to avoid. So, welcome to the application graveyard.
This is a place where applications go where they are not quite what we set out to achieve.
For example, some apps, strictly speaking, satisfy requirements, but perhaps no one ends
up using them. Perhaps they are just too hard to use. Maybe they are too slow, they are
full of technical jargon, or have some other deficiencies that make them hard to use.
That can easily kill an app. And finally, maybe the app is just ugly. So, I'm not ashamed
to admit that from time to time, one of our apps can reach or get close to the application
graveyard. Hopefully, it can be rescued from there. And I wonder, like, what's your experience?
So, put your hand up if you have seen an app that was in the application graveyard. Yeah.
A lot of you. So, hopefully, this talk can help you to avoid it in the future. So, that's
what we want to do. We want to escape the application graveyard.
Okay. So, first of all, like, of course, we are going to try to do it through great design.
But we don't only care about design for its own sake. Of course, we care about it because
great design is a path to what we really want, which is adoption, people using our apps,
and impact. That their lives are better and the results of their companies are better
as a result. And, of course, the opposite is also true.
That if we ignore design, and we by accident end up with a bad design, this can be a significant
obstacle to adoption and impact. So, that's what we would like to avoid.
So, a few words about me. My name is Michał Parkowa. I'm a manager at Appsilon.
And I manage our design team and the design tools, one of which I will tell you about in a second.
And so, also, what I wanted to share is that in my career, I have learned two things that I
wanted to share today. And that is that design is not only about how things look.
And the second thing is that it's very hard to change a larger organization.
So, hopefully, the tool I will show you in a second will help with both of those things.
But first of all, it's good to start with answering the question, what is great design?
Because design is a very general word. Many people have different ideas about what it means exactly.
So, the first thing is to clarify what do we mean by great design in our context?
So, first of all, our assumption is that great design makes apps useful for a particular type
of person, for a particular application solving an important problem for them
in their particular context. So, number one trait or result of great design is usefulness.
Number two, that great design makes apps easy to use. So, it's not enough that it technically
solves some kind of problem. It helps if it's easy to use, if it doesn't provide or put
unnecessary obstacles in the path of the users. So, number two, easy to use. And number three,
beautiful. So, as I said, it's not the most important thing. It's not the only thing
when it comes to design. But, of course, it is one of the factors. And
one reason is that there is a bias that beauty equals virtue. So, if it's beautiful,
it gets judged better regardless. And, of course, we want our users to be happy about using the app
and we want to be proud for the apps that we create. So, that's also a factor.
Okay. And one thing I wanted to underline, those are some high level aspirations. But in practice,
we are not expecting that everyone will hit perfection every time. So, it's enough to use
the tool to make things better, to make the app a little more useful, a little easier to use,
a little more beautiful. And that's already the start of a success. It doesn't have to be perfect
from the start. Okay. So, let me give you a quick example of how we use this framework
in a recent project that we had. So, we built an app for Boston Medical Center.
It took about two months. It's called the Health Equity Explorer. It helps
doctors and researchers analyze data about population health to hopefully discover
systematic factors that lead to good or bad health outcomes for a whole population or area.
And so, one thing we tried to put a lot of effort into making it useful. And we did it through,
like, close collaboration with the client. We talked almost every day to make sure that we
really understand their needs, that we understand their context, and that this app really fits
those things. And second, we tried to make it easy to use. And, of course, the key tool to make it
easy to use is user testing. So, as Maria told you a few minutes ago, it's about having the user
attempt to perform their task in the app without too much explanation, without being led by the
hand. And then we can see, are they successful? Are they not? Where do they get stuck? And so on.
And then we can go from there. So, we did a lot of user testing for this app. And then in the end,
of course, we tried to add some spit and polish to make it a little nicer to look at. So, that was
a quick example of how a framework like that can be applied. So, the question is, like, okay. Great
design. Nice story. But so, who should be involved? Like, one thing, a great design. So, maybe the
designers are responsible for design. And, of course, designers should be involved. But it's
not only designers. Like, other people need to be involved in the whole process to achieve that
goal. Like, also managers, project leaders, engineers on the team, and maybe most importantly,
the clients themselves. So, design is not only about beauty and design is also not only about
designers. So, how do you make it happen? Well, now I'll show you. So, we have several tools that
help us do that. But today I'll show you one. And this one is our design planning and evaluation
tool. It's a humble Google sheet with some sections. And so, now I will walk you through
the various sections. Don't worry about reading the details later. I will give you a link and
you can download it for yourself and learn more and hopefully adapt it or use it for your projects
as well. So, there are four sections. One is like a general information section, client up name,
the history of our involvement. Because maybe we are taking over an app or maybe we build it from
scratch or maybe we are evaluating an existing app that we didn't even make just to learn about
stuff. So, that's the first part. And then there are three parts relating to the three traits of
great design. So, blue section, usefulness, green section, easy to use, red section, beautiful.
So, zooming in on the usefulness section, one key thing is that we separate planning and
evaluation. So, at first, we started with the evaluation part. But quickly found out that
if we evaluate a project at the end, of course, that's too late to change anything about it. So,
definitely, we have to plan to achieve great design up front. And then that's at the end,
the evaluation will be better. So, one thing, there's a section to just answer the question,
like, who is it for? What is the target audience? What kind of users will use the app? Of course,
it's not enough to just say users. And what problem are we solving for them? And then we
have sections for the things that we really want to achieve, which is adoption. How many people
will be using the app? How often? Over what time? And what impact is it going to make? So, for
adoption, it helps to ask up front, okay, how are we going to measure it? Like, just putting in the
instrumentation to measure adoption is already not obvious in some situations. So, how are we going
to measure it? And then also, like, what would be a successful number? Like, what are we expecting
to achieve? And then, let's say, after a few months, let's say we have ten users. Is that a
success or not success? Well, it depends on what kind of users, what problem they are solving.
Sometimes one user using the app once can be a success if it's like, I don't know, they show it
to some senator and they then pass some law based on the that they are convinced based on the app.
So, maybe that would be a success even though it's just one user. So, it's good to have those
conversations up front. And also, an important conversation that is good to have at the start
is that to imagine, like, okay, we've shipped the we are talking about some app. The client
maybe lists some functions that they expect in the app. But then it's important to ask, okay,
so let's imagine we ship the app. All the functions are there. And what will happen then?
A very simple question. But it helps to uncover maybe gaps in our thinking that
maybe to achieve the goal that they have in mind, maybe not all of those functionalities are
necessary. Or maybe we need to do something extra. Maybe we need to do some training. Maybe we need
to do a video explaining the app to people. Or maybe we just need to collect email addresses
before we ship the app. There are many things in the general area of, let's say, product management
that we can do to achieve this bigger impact regardless of the shape of the app. So, that's
this going through this section in the sheet helps teams to have those important conversations
and to explain with clients, like, why are we asking those questions and in what context do
we see it? So, that was the usefulness section. Ease of use section includes some various methods.
That's the general shape of the tool. In each section, we collect various methods that we are
experimenting with. And over time, we can have conversations. It's not mandatory to use all the
methods for all the projects. But it contains options to consider. So, for example, the main
two things that we have in the ease of use section is, of course, user testing. So, that's the same
thing that Mario was talking about with prototyping and quick prototyping showing users. And the most
important thing is that we don't want to explain it to users and ask what they think. We want to
see them use it with minimal explanation and then talk about it. So, that's the gold standard. User
testing for us. But, of course, there are also other ways. So, we like to use this list of 10
usability heuristics by Jakob Nielsen. That's an article that summarizes how to make apps that are
easy to use. And so, for example, this is an example of a filled in evaluation for one of our
apps with those Jakob Nielsen heuristics. So, as you can see, we did a good job on visibility of
system status, but maybe not necessarily error prevention. So, that would be a signal to maybe
in the next iteration, we should think about error handling. And finally, the beauty part.
So, of course, beauty is to some extent subjective, but the opinion of specific people is
already a fact. So, we can work with that. We can have also expert feedback or also heuristic
evaluation using a slightly different set of heuristic evaluations just for aesthetics, not
usability. And finally, we had a good experience with an ebook called Refactoring UI, which contains
a lot of design tips that is specifically tailored for developers to use. So, if we don't
have a professional designer involved, it helps to use Refactoring UI and go through
just tips that are there. And you can get surprisingly far that way.
Yeah. So, those are our methods for making the app beautiful. And also, if you haven't seen
Maria's talk, maybe you can catch it online later about the power of prototyping that also helps in
this context. Okay. So, I showed you a lightning review of our this form that teams can fill in.
But you might be asking yourself, but is anyone actually going to use it if we just send by email
to all the teams, oh, here's a new form to fill. Please use it. That will probably not be effective.
And you'll probably be right that we are not expecting for people to just use it automatically.
But we are treating this tool itself with the same framework that we propose for apps.
So, we try to understand the needs of the various teams of engineers, clients,
leaders involved in those projects. We test it with users and improve. So, this sheet that you
are seeing today is actually the third iteration. And hopefully, there will be more iterations after
that. So, and like we are using it also like talking about this tool. It's also a form of
education. So, of course, we don't expect people to just understand and do everything perfectly
themselves. Rather, we work with them like in a let's say interactive way. So, with that in mind,
like we had in the past few months, we had nine practice applications of this approach. And here
are some benefits that popped up again and again. So, one benefit is that this kind of approach
helps us identify problems that can lead to bad user experience that we might otherwise miss. It
helps you like zoom out, look at the broader context, but also go through in a systematic way
through various things that even if you are an experienced developer, even if you are an
experienced designer, you might not think about every time. So, it's like a checklist for that.
Second thing is it can help find low hanging fruit. So, sometimes like it takes the same
effort to do it well compared to doing it poorly. If only we know what we should do. So, it can if
we do this evaluation early in the planning phase or evaluate an early prototype, we can
find things that we can just automatically do better without additional investment.
And number three, and maybe most importantly, it helps improve the quality of conversations that
we have around design within the team and with clients to create a shared understanding of what
we mean by various things like great design, like usefulness, and so on. And it also helps people to
just learn about the topic if they're interested in it. So, to summarize how to make apps users
love, well, first of all, think about more than just beauty. Number one, usefulness. Number two,
usability. Making it easy to use. And finally, beautiful. And it helps to talk about it, to plan
it, to be deliberate about this planning. And finally, to evaluate your progress so you can
do it better next time. And most of all, just care about it. So, if you care about it, you can
download the slides from this QR code and this link, go.appsion.com. And you can talk to me at
the booth, although the booth is disappearing soon, I hear. But you can find me in the hallway,
and if not, you can find me online. Yeah. So, thank you.
Thank you. So, I'm peeking at Slido for the questions. And one of them is how do you avoid
overengineering apps? That's a problem. But one way is to do like we do that we think about
usefulness. So, that automatically focuses our attention. Like what do we need to achieve this
purpose? And then we do user testing and with early prototypes, which also shows like are we
on the right track or not? And we do it in short iterations closely with the client. So, maybe it
happens sometimes. But that's how we reduce this risk. The other question we have is can you talk
about getting buy-in from clients or users around design decisions?
About specific design decisions or decisions in general?
Or design decisions. But I guess it extends.
I guess, you know, that's going there. So, we frame the conversation about like what are
we trying to achieve? Adoption and impact. So, if some design decision can be viewed in this
light, then it will be easy to convince people. Like if they believe that we are actually
addressing what they really want, then it will be easier to convince. It's not just design for
design's sake. Thank you. Okay. I think we're making like a landing on the spot for the coffee.
Okay. Great. So, I would love for you to join me in thanking all of our speakers again.
So, thank you very much.